---
title: Factions
categories:
- Rules
---

Factions are **large forces** outside the
control of the players. They help
create a feeling of a **living world**.

Pick or create 3-4 factions to be the
major powers within your hexcrawl.

## Using factions

Factions have goals they are trying
to complete and resources they
can utilise towards the goal’s
completion. Goals should interact
with other factions or compete for
similar resources.

**Resources** reflect the power and
influence of the faction within the
world.

Each **goal** requires 2-5 progress
marks [] to be completed, depending on its complexity.

## Goal progression

**Between sessions**, each faction will
work towards their current goal.

**Roll d6**, then adjust the value:
For each **relevant resource** the
faction has, **add 1** to the result.

If a rival faction is targeted by the goal,
subtract 1 from the result for each of
that faction’s relevant resources.
• On final result of **4-5**, mark **1 progress** toward the goal.
• On a **6+**, mark **2 progress**.

When a faction **completes a goal**,
add a **new resource** to represent
their increased power and influence.

If the goal reduces another faction’s
power and influence, remove or
change one of its resources.

As factions work towards and com-
plete their goals, update your map
to show waxing and waning power,
and add hints of current goals to
your **rumour table**.

## Player interference

As the players interact with factions,
show **signs** of the **current goals**
they are working towards.

Players should have opportunities to
interact with the factions, to thwart
or help them compete their goals.

Factions may attempt to recruit the
help of players and players may
interfere with the faction’s progress.

If the players successfully **help or
interfere** in completion of a goal,
mark or erase **1-3 progress marks**,
depending on the scale of the player
interference.

If players directly attack a faction
and significantly affect their power,
this may require you to remove or
re-write a faction’s resource.

### Bandits
#### Resources

• Ruthless gang

• Secret hideout
#### Goals

[] [] Dominate a trade route

[] [] [] Establish protection racket

[] [] [] [] Capture a fortress

### Cultists
#### Resources

• Poorly-understood eldritch power

• Clandestine insiders
#### Goals

[] [] [] Recruit the vulnerable

[] [] [] Steal powerful artifact

[] [] [] [] [] Summon ancient god

### Prince
#### Resources

• Chivalric knights

• Hidden fortress

#### Goals

[] [] Hold joust to choose a champion

[] [] [] Kidnap historian

[] [] [] [] [] Find the Grail
